
Yes, you can install vCenter and manage all your ESXi hosts from there, but there are a few points to keep in mind for your current setup:

Current Setup Summary
8 ESXi Hosts: Connected to a switch via management ports.
No Virtual Networking Configured: Each ESXi host has a physical connection but no virtual switches or port groups set up yet.
vCenter Deployment Considerations
Install vCenter on One ESXi Host:

Choose one of your ESXi hosts as the initial target to deploy the VCSA.
During deployment, you’ll need:
Management IP of the target ESXi host.
Credentials for the ESXi host (e.g., root user).
vCenter's Role After Deployment:

Once vCenter is deployed, you can use it to:
Add all 8 ESXi hosts to its inventory.
Configure networking, storage, and clustering for all hosts centrally.
Networking During Installation:

Ensure the switch is configured to allow communication between your workstation, the ESXi hosts, and the eventual vCenter appliance.
Reserve an IP for the vCenter Server that all ESXi hosts can reach (same subnet as the management ports).
Steps to Deploy vCenter and Manage Networking
Deploy vCenter Server Appliance:

Mount the ISO to your workstation.
Run the installer and point it to one ESXi host.
Specify vCenter's IP, subnet, gateway, and DNS.
Complete Stage 1 (Deployment) and Stage 2 (Configuration).
Log in to vCenter:

Access the vSphere Client via a browser at https://<vCenter-IP>:443.
Add All ESXi Hosts to vCenter:

In vCenter, go to Hosts and Clusters.
Add the other 7 ESXi hosts using their management IPs and credentials.
Configure Virtual Networking (vSwitches):

Use vCenter to create virtual switches and port groups for all the hosts.
Configure VLANs as needed for communication between virtual machines.
Set Up Clustering (Optional):

If you want to enable features like High Availability (HA) or Distributed Resource Scheduler (DRS), you can create clusters in vCenter and add the hosts to them.
Key Points:
You Don’t Need Networking Preconfigured: You can manage and configure everything after deploying vCenter.
Centralized Management: Once vCenter is up, all ESXi networking and VM creation can be managed centrally, making your setup easier.
Would you like more detailed guidance for any of these steps?






You said:
i have the ip subnet gateway but i do not have dns as a domain controller has not been made and i am in a place without internet access
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
That's perfectly fine! You can proceed with deploying vCenter Server without DNS, although having DNS simplifies management later. Here's what you need to do:

Deploying vCenter Without DNS
Static IP Address:

Ensure you have a static IP address for vCenter that is reachable by all ESXi hosts and your workstation.
Use the same subnet and gateway as your ESXi hosts' management network.
Hostname Consideration:

During installation, vCenter will ask for a hostname or FQDN. If DNS is not available:
Use the static IP address as the hostname (e.g., 192.168.1.100).
Avoid using an FQDN unless you're certain you'll set up DNS later.
Post-Installation Access:

You will access vCenter using the IP address in your browser (https://<vCenter-IP>:443).
Key Configuration Notes
No Internet Access:

You don’t need internet access for vCenter installation or ESXi management.
Ensure all devices (vCenter, ESXi hosts, your workstation) are on the same isolated network for communication.
Later DNS Setup:

If you eventually set up a Domain Controller or DNS server, you can add DNS to vCenter later. However, reconfiguring the hostname to use an FQDN may require additional steps.
Steps Summary for Your Environment
Run the vCenter Installer:

Specify the static IP, subnet, and gateway during deployment.
Use the IP address as the hostname.
Add ESXi Hosts to vCenter:

Use their static IPs to register them in vCenter.
Configure Networking via vCenter:

After deployment, create virtual switches and port groups for your ESXi hosts.
Monitor and Manage:

From the vCenter interface, you can begin managing your environment.
Would you like help with detailed installation steps or with post-deployment configuration?






You said:
when it asks for dns server what do i put
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
If you don’t have a DNS server available during the installation of vCenter, you can do the following:

Options for the DNS Server Field:
Use the Default Gateway as a Placeholder:

If your gateway is acting as a basic resolver, you can use the gateway IP address (e.g., 192.168.1.1).
This is common in small or isolated networks.
Use a Loopback Address:

Enter 127.0.0.1 (localhost) as a placeholder if no DNS functionality is required initially.
Leave It Blank or Use a Dummy IP:

Some installers may allow you to skip DNS. If not:
Enter an unreachable IP (e.g., 0.0.0.0 or 1.1.1.1) as a placeholder, which can be updated later when DNS is available.
Point to a Future or Placeholder DNS Server:

If you know the IP of a DNS server you'll configure later, you can enter it now as a placeholder.
What Happens Without DNS?
No FQDN Resolution:

You won’t be able to use hostnames (e.g., esxi01.local) for vCenter or ESXi hosts.
Everything must be managed using IP addresses.
Can Be Fixed Later:

You can add or update DNS settings in vCenter after installation via the appliance management interface (https://<vCenter-IP>:5480).
Recommendation:
If unsure, use your gateway IP or a common DNS placeholder like 8.8.8.8. It’s primarily for internal name resolution and can be updated later. Let me know if you'd like more assistance!






You said:
okay so what if i get a ssl cert error during installation
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
If you encounter an SSL certificate error during the vCenter installation, it's usually because the installer uses a self-signed certificate by default, which is not trusted by your browser or operating system. Here's how to handle it:

Causes of SSL Certificate Errors
Self-Signed Certificate:

By default, vCenter generates a self-signed SSL certificate for secure communication, but it won’t be trusted by browsers or other systems.
Mismatch in Hostname/IP:

If you’re accessing vCenter via IP address but the certificate was generated for a hostname, a mismatch can trigger a warning.
No DNS Resolution:

If you configured the vCenter with a hostname and your environment lacks DNS, certificate validation fails.
Solutions During Installation
Ignore the Warning Temporarily:

During the setup, you can safely proceed by accepting or bypassing the SSL warning in your browser.
For CLI-based tools, there’s usually an option to ignore certificate warnings (e.g., --no-verify).
Generate a Custom SSL Certificate:

Use an internal Certificate Authority (CA) or create one using OpenSSL.
Provide the custom certificate during the vCenter installation process.
Reconfigure Certificates Later:

After the installation, replace the default self-signed certificate with one signed by a trusted CA (internal or external). This can be done via the vSphere Client or the appliance management interface (https://<vCenter-IP>:5480).
If the Error Stops Installation
If the SSL error prevents installation:

Verify Network Configuration:
Ensure you’re using the correct hostname or IP for the certificate and that DNS is not causing the issue.
Check Time Synchronization:
SSL certificates are time-sensitive. Make sure the ESXi host, vCenter, and workstation have synchronized time settings.
Long-Term Fix
To avoid future SSL issues:

Set up an internal CA to sign the certificates.
Configure vCenter to use these signed certificates during or after installation.
Add the internal CA's root certificate to your workstation's trusted certificate store.
Would you like detailed guidance on generating or importing a custom certificate?






You said:
but since i dont have a dns server and the installation fails then what do i do
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
If your vCenter installation fails because of the lack of a DNS server, you can resolve the issue by ensuring that the installer has a way to resolve hostnames. Since DNS is unavailable in your environment, follow these steps:

Workaround for No DNS During vCenter Installation
1. Use IP Address Instead of Hostname
During installation, when asked for the FQDN or hostname of the vCenter server:
Use the static IP address of the vCenter Server (e.g., 192.168.1.100).
Ensure the ESXi host you’re deploying to can communicate with this IP.
2. Modify the hosts File
Add a local hostname-to-IP mapping on your workstation and ESXi host. This avoids the need for DNS.

Edit the hosts file:

On Windows:
Open C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts in a text editor (as Administrator).
On Linux/Mac:
Edit /etc/hosts.
Add a line:
lua
Copy
Edit
<vCenter-IP>   vcenter.local
Example:
lua
Copy
Edit
192.168.1.100   vcenter.local
This makes your workstation and ESXi host treat the hostname (vcenter.local) as the vCenter's IP address.

3. Set Up Forward and Reverse Resolution in the Installer
If the installer still requires DNS, configure both:
Hostname (FQDN): Use vcenter.local (or another hostname you added in /etc/hosts).
IP Address: Use the static IP (e.g., 192.168.1.100).
4. Skip SSL Validation Temporarily
If the installer halts due to SSL errors (common when using IPs):
Check for an option to ignore SSL validation during installation.
Proceed without SSL warnings, as you can replace certificates later.
5. Troubleshoot with Logs
If the installation still fails, check the logs:
On your workstation: Look for errors in the vCenter installer logs (%TEMP% on Windows).
On the ESXi host: Check the task status for VM deployment errors.
Post-Installation
Once the vCenter is operational, you can:
Add DNS to your environment later (if you deploy a Domain Controller).
Update vCenter settings to use DNS via the Appliance Management Interface (https://<vCenter-IP>:5480).
Let me know if you'd like step-by-step assistance with modifying the hosts file or configuring the installation!






You said:
so as long as the switch is in a bare minumum configuration where my workstation can ping all esxi hosts and an esxi hosts can ping eachother i should be able to set it up
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
Yes, that’s correct! As long as the following conditions are met, you should be able to set up vCenter successfully:

Minimum Requirements for Your Setup
Network Connectivity:

Your workstation can ping all ESXi hosts over their management IPs.
ESXi hosts can ping each other over their management IPs.
IP Configuration:

Each ESXi host and your workstation are on the same subnet or properly routed.
vCenter is assigned a static IP address in this network.
Switch Configuration:

The switch is minimally configured to allow Layer 2/Layer 3 communication (no advanced VLAN tagging or access control rules are blocking traffic).
No DNS Dependency:

Use IP addresses instead of hostnames for the installation process.
If the installer requires an FQDN, use the /etc/hosts file workaround (as described earlier).
vCenter Appliance Deployment:

Use the workstation to run the vCenter installer.
Point the installer to one ESXi host where the vCenter VM will be deployed.
Example Workflow
Preparation:

Verify that you can ping all ESXi hosts and they can ping each other.
Reserve a static IP for vCenter (e.g., 192.168.1.100).
Run the vCenter Installer:

Mount the vCenter ISO on your workstation.
Choose Install and specify:
The ESXi host for deployment.
Static IP, subnet mask, and gateway for vCenter.
Deployment Process:

The installer will upload the VCSA template to the ESXi host.
vCenter will start configuring itself with the IP address you provided.
Access vCenter:

Once the installation is complete, log in to vCenter at https://<vCenter-IP>:443 using the credentials you set during the install.
After Deployment
Add the remaining ESXi hosts to vCenter by their management IPs.
Configure networking (vSwitches, VLANs) and storage (datastores) through vCenter for all hosts.
If you meet the above requirements, the installation should work smoothly even in a minimal setup. Let me know if you'd like additional guidance!






You said:
so if the installer asks for fqdn i have to go in the hosts file of both my workstation and ssh into the esxi host and there aswell
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
Yes, that's correct! If the vCenter installer requires an FQDN and you don’t have a DNS server, you'll need to manually add entries to the hosts files on both your workstation and the ESXi host. This ensures that the FQDN resolves properly during installation.

Steps to Configure the hosts File
1. Workstation Configuration
On your workstation, edit the hosts file to map the vCenter IP to the FQDN.

Windows:

Open C:\Windows\System32\drivers\etc\hosts in a text editor with Administrator privileges.
Add a line like this:
lua
Copy
Edit
192.168.1.100   vcenter.local
Linux/Mac:

Open /etc/hosts in a text editor with sudo permissions.
Add the same line:
lua
Copy
Edit
192.168.1.100   vcenter.local
2. ESXi Host Configuration
SSH into the ESXi host where the VCSA will be deployed:
Open a terminal and connect to the ESXi host:
kotlin
Copy
Edit
ssh root@<ESXi-Host-IP>
Edit the hosts file on the ESXi host:
bash
Copy
Edit
vi /etc/hosts
Add the same entry:
lua
Copy
Edit
192.168.1.100   vcenter.local
Save the file:
Press Esc, then type :wq and hit Enter.
Notes
Both Files Must Match:

The FQDN (vcenter.local) must resolve to the same IP (192.168.1.100) on both the workstation and the ESXi host.
Ping Test:

After editing, test name resolution from both systems:
From your workstation: ping vcenter.local.
From the ESXi host: ping vcenter.local.
Future DNS Server:

If you deploy a DNS server later, update the DNS records and remove these manual hosts file entries.
If You Can’t Edit hosts on ESXi
If for some reason you can't modify the hosts file on the ESXi host, you can:

Use the IP address of the vCenter during installation (if allowed).
Set up a temporary DNS server on your workstation (e.g., using a lightweight tool or software).
Let me know if you need assistance with any of these steps!






You said:
what if it asks for ESxi host or vcenter server name
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
If the installer asks for the ESXi host or vCenter Server name and you don’t have DNS set up, here’s what you should do:

For ESXi Host Name
When the installer asks for the ESXi host name, you have two options:

Use the IP Address:

Enter the ESXi host’s management IP address (e.g., 192.168.1.10).
This works perfectly in environments without DNS.
Use an FQDN (if Required):

If the installer forces you to provide a hostname or FQDN:
Edit the hosts file on your workstation (and on the ESXi host if needed).
Map the IP to a hostname:
lua
Copy
Edit
192.168.1.10   esxi01.local
Then use esxi01.local as the ESXi host name during installation.
For vCenter Server Name
When the installer asks for the vCenter Server name (FQDN or hostname), follow these steps:

Use the vCenter IP Address:

If allowed, simply use the static IP address you reserved for the vCenter Server (e.g., 192.168.1.100).
If It Requires an FQDN:

Use a custom FQDN (e.g., vcenter.local).
Add it to the hosts file on both:
Your workstation:
lua
Copy
Edit
192.168.1.100   vcenter.local
The ESXi host:
SSH into the ESXi host and edit /etc/hosts to add:
lua
Copy
Edit
192.168.1.100   vcenter.local
Then provide vcenter.local as the server name during installation.
Why This Works
The hosts file ensures name-to-IP resolution locally, bypassing the need for a DNS server.
The installer and the ESXi host will resolve the names correctly, as long as they reference the same IP-to-hostname mapping.
Key Points
If FQDN is mandatory, ensure consistent hosts file entries on all involved systems.
Use IP addresses whenever possible to avoid unnecessary complexity.
Once vCenter is deployed, you can later integrate DNS into your setup for future hostname resolution.
Let me know if you need help with testing or troubleshooting!






You said:
and what do i put when it asks for sso domain name
ChatGPT said:
ChatGPT
When the vCenter installer asks for the SSO (Single Sign-On) domain name, this is not related to DNS or an external domain like example.com. The SSO domain is specific to vCenter and used to manage authentication and roles within the vSphere environment.

What to Enter for SSO Domain Name
Default Recommendation:

Use the default SSO domain name provided during the installation:

lua
Copy
Edit
vsphere.local
This is the most common choice unless you have a specific naming convention in your organization.

Custom SSO Domain (Optional):

You can specify a custom domain if desired, but ensure it does not conflict with any existing domain in your environment. Examples:
lua
Copy
Edit
mycompany.local
lab.local
vcenter.local
Important Notes About SSO Domain
Not Related to DNS:

The SSO domain is internal to vCenter and is used only for managing vCenter users and authentication. It does not require an external DNS server.
Permanent Choice:

Once set, the SSO domain name cannot be changed without redeploying vCenter, so choose carefully.
User Accounts in SSO:

The default administrator account for the SSO domain will be:
sql
Copy
Edit
administrator@vsphere.local
Replace vsphere.local with your custom domain if you choose one.
Recommended Action
For simplicity and compatibility, stick with the default vsphere.local unless you have a strong reason to customize it.

Let me know if you have more questions about the SSO configuration or anything else!






